## Introduction

Cardiovascular disease is the leading cause of death globally, accounting for over 31% of deaths across the world. Early detection of cardiovasular disease is still a major challenge even with recent advances in medical research and technology. As the data on patients with and without cardiovascular disease is ever-growing, machine learning is a powerful tool to leverage to determine early indications of heart disease. Machine learning algorithms can take in numerous variables ranging from biometric data to lifestyle choices and learn to detect early signs of heart disease. This RShiny app looks at a small subset, 918 observations, of heart disease data across 11 features and leverage logistic regression to predict heart disease. This example aims to show how a simple machine learning algorithm can predict heart disease with high accuracy. With more observations across a greater number of variables, one could imagine the immense affects a tool like this could have on modern healthcare.

## Methods

The [**Heart Disease Dataset**](https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/fedesoriano/heart-failure-prediction) was split into a 70% train/validation set and a 30% test set using a random seed of 123. The respective datasets were saved for later reference. One-hot encoding was performed on categorical variables to ensure numeric data types for the algorithm. The linear support vector machine and logistic regression algorithms were compared by a five fold cross validation to determine the best algorithm. This cross validation was done on all features, and logistic regression was seen to have the highest average accuracy across the folds. This RShiny app was developed to allow customization into the training and prediction sets. Users are able to select features and adjust the threshold to see how the model performs. Additionally, principal component analysis is performed on the selected features to visualize the prediction in two dimensions. Lastly, users are able to select X and Y variables to visualize the data in two dimensions using the actual numerical features.

## Discussion and Conclusion

This app aims to show the benefits of using a simple machine learning algorithm, logistic regression, on predicting heart disease. Users are able to choose features and adjust the threshold to see the model output change in real time and learn which variables best predict heart disease. In the future, this could be expanded to read in more observations across a larger set of variables. Additionally, imaging data, such as cardiac MRIs or echocardiograms, could also be added to provide another layer of complexity to this tool. With imaging data, more complex machine learning algorithms would need to be leveraged, such as neural networks. Overall, this app shows the benefits of machine learning in healthcare.